# OpenBooks Tenth Anniversary Retrospective

A brief history of OpenBooks, the Network Neighborhood, and some plans and insight for the next version of OpenBooks.
* by Coyote Reyne.

## Humble beginnings

Ten years ago, I fired up a copy of Dreamweaver 8, an already woefully oudated website creation suite, and set out to create a retro-styled website for Neocities, a Geocities-like webhost a friend of mine showed me. In just a few short hours, chromebooks.neocities.org was live, and 16 year old me had no idea what I had just started.

From then on, a small group of friends had started managing our own Neocities websites, and collaborated on others. We called this new collective The Network Neighborhood. Officially started on September 14th, 2014, our fledgling webring was born. 

In those days, Neocities was a much smaller world, so it didn't take much for the rest of the community to notice us. Before too long, all eyes seemed to be on us, and everything we were doing. Chromebooks' and The Network Neighborhood's popularity grew. In early 2016, I renamed Chromebooks to OpenBooks. 

## With attention, comes tensions.

However, at this time, tensions between members of The Network Neighborhood had started to rise, as differing opinions on collaborations and artistic directions started to strain relationships, something that became visible even on the outside with my short departure from the group. I rejoined later on, essentially taking full control of the group, something I now regret. My own leadership, or lackthereof, actually ended up causing several members of the group to leave. OpenBooks continued on, still trying to serve a purpose of being both my personal site, and a web portal.

The Network Neighborhood eventually dissolved later in 2015, causing much drama and speculation in the Neocities community. OpenBooks in 2016, with the release of version 5, caused further drama with its new modern look, and stark-white design. I had grown frustrated with the same-ness found on Neocities at the time, as most people were focused on creating simple, 90s style websites. Looking at what I wrote now, I definitely should have been less pointed in tone, but Neocities users have also naturally branched out since then, and some users actually dedicate time and effort to supporting mobile browsers and accessibility. 

## A restart.

Still, I wasn't able to let the idea of the Network Neighborhood rest, and started teasing a sequel webring until its eventual release, much later in 2018. It was short lived, as the Neocities community had dramatically changed and grown in that time. OpenBooks was having a bit of an identity crisis as well, never quite being fully a web portal or personal site. 
In 2019, OpenBooks 8 was released, becoming the longest-lived version of the site to date. I think these original releases of Series 8 are still some of my best work on the site this far. Until now, every version since then has been based on its codebase. OpenBooks 9 had more visual cohesion and finally added mobile support. OpenBooks 9 and 10 stripped things back further, but I think in doing this, something was lost.

## New goals.

All the way back since version 2, in 2015, I had intended some parts of OpenBooks to be user submitted. A lot of that was put to the wayside when focusing on network2, and later the OpenBooks Webring (which is still referred to in code as 'network3'), but I want OpenBooks 11 to finally be the Neocities community hub I've always planned on it becoming. This re-written version of OpenBooks will be content-first, for the first time in OpenBooks' history. There should be an actual reason to visit the site, not just to look at some pretty CSS.

OpenBooks 11 will be community driven, finally living up to its original 2015 vision. Though the beta is here today, the only plan for a full, final release in "before September", just in time for the ten year anniversary, on the date. This will be the most complete version of OpenBooks, and should return it to being something I'm truly proud of.